# Secure Ubuntu Server 18.04 BTRFS

-  *Standard disclaimer: do not assume I know what I am doing or any instructions below should be used outside of personal experimentation and learning. All comments are my own and do not reflect the thoughts or direction of my employer, family, friends, favorite television and radio station or anything else.*
-  **Confirmed as working in VirtualBox BIOS and EFI and physical machine EFI - 01/26/2020 11:42:57 AM**

Note: I found Thomas Sjögren's aka konstruktoid's [hardening](https://github.com/konstruktoid/hardening) repository maybe a month after first starting the revamp of the originally based on LVM document I did for 16.04 and 14.04. It appears Thomas is way more advanced than I and if you need a serious solution maybe go there first?

Alsø Nøte: I am well aware of the arguments for and against BTRFS (i.e. it's great until it isn't) but Facebook is using it so why not..?

A Møøse once bit my sister...

## Goal

The goal of this document is to create a secure installation of Ubuntu Server using the BTRFS file system. This is an attempt to combine numerous online resources into something that is both reasonable and implementable in a small to midsize virtualized environment.

# Create the Virtual Machine

Two storage devices are created for the virtual machine. The first device is for the BTRFS based operating system and the second for temporary file systems.

The separation of devices was a consideration for environments using a disaster recovery software system (my employer uses Zerto) where the Zerto best practices guide recommends:

*When configuring a VPG, Zerto Virtual Replication provides an option to mark individual volumes as "Temp Data Disk" (formerly known as "Swap"). This functionality is extremely useful when your operating system or database has a dedicated volume for swap, virtual memory, temporary backups, or files that are only relevant to a live and running machine, and are useless following a reboot. When one of the protected VM volumes is marked as a "Temp Data Disk" volume, upon saving the VPG, the volume will undergo an Initial Sync. However, all subsequent IOs to that volume will be ignored. The purpose of the Initial Sync's is to make sure the full remote file system is available in the event of a Failover Test, Live Failover, Move, or Offsite Clone operation.*

This makes sense. You would not want temporary or volatile data being replicated over a leased line to a remote site used for disaster recovery. Plus this also solves `/tmp` mount options and where to put `swap`

## Installation

Assumes VirtualBox on Windows 10 host; obviously alter to your host either physical or virtual

```DOS .bat
SET VM=Ubuntu Server 18.04 BTRFS Secure BIOS
SET VG=Server Templates
SET BF=%VDID%\%VG%
%VB% createvm --name "%VM%" --groups "/Server Templates" --ostype Ubuntu_64 --register
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --snapshotfolder default --clipboard-mode bidirectional --draganddrop hosttoguest
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --memory 2048 --boot2 dvd --boot1 disk --boot3 none --boot4 none --firmware bios --chipset piix3 --acpi on --ioapic on --rtcuseutc on --cpus 2 --cpuhotplug on --cpuexecutioncap 100 --pae on --paravirtprovider kvm --hpet on --hwvirtex on --nestedpaging on
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --vram 16 --monitorcount 1 --accelerate3d off --audio none --usb on --usbehci on
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --nic1 bridged --cableconnected1 on --nictype1 virtio --bridgeadapter1 "%VNIC%"
%VB% storagectl "%VM%" --name "IDE" --add ide --controller PIIX4 --hostiocache on --bootable on
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "IDE" --port 1 --device 0 --type dvddrive --medium "%VISO%\ubuntu-18.04-mini-amd64.iso"
%VB% storagectl "%VM%" --name "SATA" --add sata --controller IntelAhci --portcount 6 --hostiocache off --bootable on
%VB% createhd --filename "%BF%\%VM%\UBU1804S0.vdi" --size 80000
%VB% createhd --filename "%BF%\%VM%\UBU1804S1.vdi" --size 10000
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "SATA" --port 0 --type hdd --medium "%BF%\%VM%\UBU1804S0.vdi" --mtype normal
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "SATA" --port 1 --type hdd --medium "%BF%\%VM%\UBU1804S1.vdi" --mtype normal
%VB% startvm "%VM%"
```

Use the defaults for the installation process with the exception of the following:

-  User Full Name: System Administrator
-  User: sadmin  *get it - "sad" min - ha ha ok sorry should be serious here*
-  Manual Partitioning
   1.  disk 0 (depends on boot type; I also like to leave about 10% free at the end of the root disk)
       -   for BIOS; new partition type BTRFS mount `/`
       -   for UEFI; new partition type EFI system 128M, new partion type BTRFS mount `/`
   2.  Setup LVM
       1.  create volume group `temp_vg`
       2.  choose disk 1; a partition will be created for you
       3.  create logical volume `lv_swap` 4GB
       4.  create logical volume `lv_temp` 4GB
   3.  set lv_swap type swap
   4.  set lv_temp type ext4 mount `/tmp`
-  Install Basic Server and OpenSSH Server

NOTE: installing mini on VirtualBox with UEFI was odd; I could not set the time zone and it thought I was in the UK for some reason...

## Post Install 

I prefer to do most operations using PuTTY versus using the virtual machine console to allow for easy copy and paste to accomplish tasks. To do this you need to determine the IP address of the virtual machine using `ip a` then connect from your host.

# Securing the System Part One - The Filesystem Menace

This step creates files to be used during a GParted session to configure the BTRFS file system for optimal security, stability and recoverability. The guides for SLES and for Arch Linux were used as a template and applied to Ubuntu Linux.

The common theme of using BTRFS for the operating system file system is to have a single point for snapshot creation and if needed, recovery and separation of some directories to separate snapshots or filesystems. This document does the following:

-  `/tmp` is already on a separate file system at installation, modification of /etc/fstab is the only thing required
-  `/home` is already on a separate sub volume, modification of /etc/fstab is the only thing required
-  `/boot/grub` contains a directory that should be preserved on snapshot recovery
-  `/var` contains directories that should not be included in a system snapshot due to their volatile nature or for preservation of logs or data to be used in problem determination before recovering a snapshot
-  `/var/log` is moved to a separate sub volume and mounted at startup - `@var-log`
-  sub volume `@snapshot` is created to use when creating snapshots of the system; it can be mounted for the snapshot than unmounted when the snapshot is complete keeping it separate from the root sub volume
-  creates a /etc/fstab to copy

The sub volume layout differs from SUSE Linux Enterprise Server as follows:

-  `/boot` .. uses Grub not Grub2
-  `/home` .. is already a separate mount in subvolume @home
-  `/opt, /var/opt` .. would be part of updates so IMO would be part of a rollback is something gets screwed up ???
-  `/srv` .. if used, would already have a separate disk and/or file system mounted on it ???
-  `/tmp` .. already on a separate disk and mount
-  `/usr/local` .. same as `/opt` ???
-  `/var/lib/mail` .. is `/var/mail` on Ubuntu
-  `/var/lib/mariadb, /var/lib/mysql, /var/lib/pgqsl` .. if used, would already have a separate disk mounted on it ??? also no need to disable copy-on-write since file system would be specific to best performance for database used ???

When editing the /etc/fstab the UUID is the most important thing to preserve; that is the unique identifier for the first partition on the first disk. The mount options are modified and `/var/log` is added as a sub volume.

## Questions ?

-  `/var/snap` ??? I assume this is for the snap architecture so would not be part of a system snapshot?  At this time, create a sub volume to use for this directory ???
-  bind `/var/tmp` to `/tmp` ??? technically `/var/tmp` should persist between restarts while `/tmp` does not so binding it to temp is not recommended ???
-  Per UK site: temporarily make the `/tmp` directory executable before running `apt-get` and remove execution flag afterwards. This is because sometimes apt writes files into `/tmp` and executes them from there --- I have NEVER been able to get this to work --- ???

```
echo -e "DPkg::Pre-Invoke{\"mount -o remount,exec /tmp\";};\nDPkg::Post-Invoke {\"mount -o remount /tmp\";};" >> /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/99tmpexec
chmod 644 /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/99tmpexec
```

## Filesystem Hardening Part 1

```
sudo -i
scp 192.168.0.184:server/* ~
. btrfs.prep
```

## Filesystem Hardening Part 2


Attach the GParted .iso and start the system. 

```DOS
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --boot1 dvd --boot2 disk
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "IDE" --port 1 --device 0 --type dvddrive --medium "%VISO%\gparted-live-1.0.0-5-amd64.iso"
%VB% startvm "%VM%"
```

Choose default, default, default, 2 (command line) then do one of the following base on the firmware:

### BIOS

```
mkdir /b
mount /dev/sda1 /b
cp /b/@/root/btrfs.todo.bios /todo
. todo
```

### EFI

```
mkdir /b
mount /dev/sda1 /b
cp /b/@/root/btrfs.todo.uefi /todo
. todo
```

After restart, the GParted .iso will be ejected from the CD-ROM and the system will start with a secured file system.

```DOS
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --boot2 dvd --boot1 disk
%VB% startvm "%VM%"
```

# Hand Off

With the file system secured, continue with [Ubuntu Server 18.04 Common](18.04_Secure_Common.md) to finish up.

# Resources

-  [BTRFS](https://rootco.de/2018-01-19-opensuse-btrfs-subvolumes/)
-  [BTRFS](https://susedoc.github.io/doc-sle/SLE12SP3/SLES-storage/html/cha-filesystems.html#sec-filesystems-major-btrfs)
-  [BTRFS](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Snapper#Suggested_filesystem_layout)
-  [BTRFS](https://www.reddit.com/r/Ubuntu/comments/7qp9gb/btrfs_pop_os_recommended_subvolumes/)
