# Secure Ubuntu Server 20.04 BTRFS

-  *Standard disclaimer: do not assume I know what I am doing or any instructions below should be used outside of personal experimentation and learning. All comments are my own and do not reflect the thoughts or direction of my employer, family, friends, favorite television and radio station or anything else.*

## So what's new?

The Ubuntu 20.04 server install does not create a subvolume for the root mount point and just stuffs everything in the default subvolume (ID=5). So this renders all previous work with BTRFS and mounted subvolumes for backup and recovery a pain in the ass.

-  Using [Root File System Setup on SUSE Linux Enterprise Server](https://documentation.suse.com/) as the starting point
-  Thomas Sjögren's aka konstruktoid's [hardening](https://github.com/konstruktoid/hardening) repository will be used for most of the hardening process and additional subvolumes
-  Alsø Nøte: I am well aware of the arguments for and against BTRFS (i.e. it's great until it isn't) but Facebook is using it so why not..?
-  A Møøse once bit my sister...

## Goal

The goal of this document is to create a secure installation of Ubuntu Server using the BTRFS file system. This is an attempt to combine numerous online resources into something that is both reasonable and implementable in a small to midsize virtualized environment.

# Create the Virtual Machine

Two storage devices are created for the virtual machine. The first device is for the BTRFS based operating system and the second for temporary file systems.

The separation of devices was a consideration for environments using a disaster recovery software system (my employer uses Zerto) where the Zerto best practices guide recommends:

*When configuring a VPG, Zerto Virtual Replication provides an option to mark individual volumes as "Temp Data Disk" (formerly known as "Swap"). This functionality is extremely useful when your operating system or database has a dedicated volume for swap, virtual memory, temporary backups, or files that are only relevant to a live and running machine, and are useless following a reboot. When one of the protected VM volumes is marked as a "Temp Data Disk" volume, upon saving the VPG, the volume will undergo an Initial Sync. However, all subsequent IOs to that volume will be ignored. The purpose of the Initial Sync's is to make sure the full remote file system is available in the event of a Failover Test, Live Failover, Move, or Offsite Clone operation.*

This makes sense. You would not want temporary or volatile data being replicated over a leased line to a remote site used for disaster recovery. Plus this also solves `/tmp` mount options and where to put `swap`

## Installation

Assumes VirtualBox on Windows 10 host; obviously alter to your host either physical or virtual

```DOS .bat
SET VM=Ubuntu Server 20.04 BTRFS Secure BIOS
SET VG=Server Templates
SET BF=%VDID%\%VG%
%VB% createvm --name "%VM%" --groups "/Server Templates" --ostype Ubuntu_64 --register
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --snapshotfolder default --clipboard-mode bidirectional --draganddrop hosttoguest
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --memory 2048 --boot2 dvd --boot1 disk --boot3 none --boot4 none --firmware bios --chipset piix3 --acpi on --ioapic on --rtcuseutc on --cpus 2 --cpuhotplug on --cpuexecutioncap 100 --pae on --paravirtprovider kvm --hpet on --hwvirtex on --nestedpaging on
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --vram 16 --monitorcount 1 --accelerate3d off --audio none --usb on --usbehci on
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --nic1 bridged --cableconnected1 on --nictype1 virtio --bridgeadapter1 "%VNIC%"
%VB% storagectl "%VM%" --name "IDE" --add ide --controller PIIX4 --hostiocache on --bootable on
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "IDE" --port 1 --device 0 --type dvddrive --medium "%VISO%\ubuntu-20.04-mini-amd64.iso"
%VB% storagectl "%VM%" --name "SATA" --add sata --controller IntelAhci --portcount 6 --hostiocache off --bootable on
%VB% createhd --filename "%BF%\%VM%\UBU2004M0.vdi" --size 80000
%VB% createhd --filename "%BF%\%VM%\UBU2004M1.vdi" --size 12000
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "SATA" --port 0 --type hdd --medium "%BF%\%VM%\UBU2004M0.vdi" --mtype normal
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "SATA" --port 1 --type hdd --medium "%BF%\%VM%\UBU2004M1.vdi" --mtype normal
%VB% startvm "%VM%"
```

Use the defaults for the installation process with the exception of the following:

-  User Full Name: System Administrator
-  User: `sadmin`  *get it - "sad" min - ha ha ok sorry should be serious here*
-  Manual Partitioning
   1.  disk 0 (depends on boot type; I also like to leave about 10% free at the end of the root disk)
       -   for BIOS; new partition type BTRFS mount `/`
       -   for UEFI; new partition type EFI system 128M, new partion type BTRFS mount `/`
   2.  Setup LVM
       1.  create volume group `temp_vg`
       2.  choose disk 1
       3.  create logical volume `lv_swap1` 4GB
       4.  create logical volume `lv_temp1` 4GB
   3.  set lv_swap1 type swap
   4.  set lv_temp1 type ext4 mount `/tmp`
-  Install Basic Server and OpenSSH Server

NOTE: installing mini on VirtualBox with UEFI was odd; I could not set the time zone and it thought I was in the UK for some reason...

## Post Install 

This step creates files to be used during a GParted session to configure the BTRFS file system for optimal security, stability and recoverability.

The common theme of using BTRFS for the operating system file system is to have a single point for snapshot creation and if needed, recovery and separation of some directories to separate snapshots or filesystems. This document does the following:

-  `/tmp` is already on a separate file system at installation, modification of /etc/fstab is the only thing required
-  `/home` is already on a separate sub volume, modification of /etc/fstab is the only thing required
-  `/boot/grub` contains a directory that should be preserved on snapshot recovery
-  `/var` contains directories that should not be included in a system snapshot due to their volatile nature or for preservation of logs or data to be used in problem determination before recovering a snapshot and is moved to a separate sub volume `@var` and mounted at startup with Copy-On-Write disabled
-  `/var/log` is moved to a separate sub volume and mounted at startup - `@var-log` 
-  `/var/log/audit` is moved to a separate sub volume and mounted at startup - `@var-audit` 
-  `/var/tmp` is moved to a separate sub volume and mounted at startup - `@var-tmp` 
-  sub volume `@snapshot` is created to use when creating snapshots of the system; it can be mounted for the snapshot than unmounted when the snapshot is complete keeping it separate from the root sub volume
-  creates a /etc/fstab to copy

The sub volume layout differs from SUSE Linux Enterprise Server as follows:

-  `/boot` .. uses Grub not Grub2
-  `/home` .. is already a separate mount in subvolume @home
-  `/srv` .. if used, would already have a separate disk and/or file system mounted on it ???
-  `/tmp` .. already on a separate disk and mount

When editing the /etc/fstab the UUID is the most important thing to preserve; that is the unique identifier for the first partition on the first disk. The mount options are modified and `/var/log` is added as a sub volume.

