# Secure Ubuntu Server 20.04 LVM

-  *Standard disclaimer: do not assume I know what I am doing or any instructions below should be used outside of personal experimentation and learning. All comments are my own and do not reflect the thoughts or direction of my employer, family, friends, favorite television and radio station or anything else.*
-  *Work in progress*

Note: Based on Thomas Sjögren's aka konstruktoid's [hardening](https://github.com/konstruktoid/hardening) repository.

## Goal

The goal of this document is to create a secure installation of Ubuntu Server using LVM. This is an attempt to combine numerous online resources into something that is both reasonable and implementable in a small to midsize virtualized environment.

# Create the Virtual Machine

Two storage devices are created for the virtual machine. The first device is for the LVM operating system volume group `root_vg` and the second for temporary file systems volume group `temp_vg`.

The separation of devices was a consideration for environments using a disaster recovery software system (my employer uses Zerto) where the Zerto best practices guide recommends:

*When configuring a VPG, Zerto Virtual Replication provides an option to mark individual volumes as "Temp Data Disk" (formerly known as "Swap"). This functionality is extremely useful when your operating system or database has a dedicated volume for swap, virtual memory, temporary backups, or files that are only relevant to a live and running machine, and are useless following a reboot. When one of the protected VM volumes is marked as a "Temp Data Disk" volume, upon saving the VPG, the volume will undergo an Initial Sync. However, all subsequent IOs to that volume will be ignored. The purpose of the Initial Sync's is to make sure the full remote file system is available in the event of a Failover Test, Live Failover, Move, or Offsite Clone operation.*

This makes sense. You would not want temporary or volatile data being replicated over a leased line to a remote site used for disaster recovery. Plus this also solves `/tmp` mount options and where to put `swap`

## Installation

Assumes VirtualBox on Windows 10 host; obviously alter to your host either physical or virtual

```DOS .bat
SET VM=Ubuntu Server 20.04 LVM Secure BASE
SET VG=Server Templates
SET BF=%VDID%\%VG%
%VB% createvm --name "%VM%" --groups "/Server Templates" --ostype Ubuntu_64 --register
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --snapshotfolder default --clipboard bidirectional --draganddrop hosttoguest
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --memory 2048 --boot2 dvd --boot1 disk --boot3 none --boot4 none --firmware bios --chipset piix3 --acpi on --ioapic on --rtcuseutc on --cpus 2 --cpuhotplug on --cpuexecutioncap 100 --pae on --paravirtprovider kvm --hpet on --hwvirtex on --nestedpaging on
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --vram 16 --monitorcount 1 --accelerate3d off --audio none --usb on --usbehci on
%VB% modifyvm "%VM%" --nic1 bridged --cableconnected1 on --nictype1 virtio --bridgeadapter1 "%VNIC%"
%VB% storagectl "%VM%" --name "IDE" --add ide --controller PIIX4 --hostiocache on --bootable on
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "IDE" --port 1 --device 0 --type dvddrive --medium "%VISO%\ubuntu-20.04-mini-amd64.iso"
%VB% storagectl "%VM%" --name "SATA" --add sata --controller IntelAhci --portcount 6 --hostiocache off --bootable on
%VB% createhd --filename "%BF%\%VM%\UBU2004S0.vdi" --size 80000
%VB% createhd --filename "%BF%\%VM%\UBU2004S1.vdi" --size 20000
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "SATA" --port 0 --type hdd --medium "%BF%\%VM%\UBU2004S0.vdi" --mtype normal
%VB% storageattach "%VM%" --storagectl "SATA" --port 1 --type hdd --medium "%BF%\%VM%\UBU2004S1.vdi" --mtype normal
%VB% startvm "%VM%"
```

Use the defaults for the installation process with the exception of the following:

-  User Full Name: System Administrator
-  User: sadmin  *get it - "sad" min - ha ha ok sorry should be serious here*
-  Manual Partitioning
   1.  disk 0 - new partition type LVM physical volume
   2.  disk 1 - new partition type LVM physical volume
   3.  Setup LVM
       1.  create volume group `root_vg` on disk 0
       2.  create logical volume `lv_root` 30GB
       3.  create logical volume `lv_home` 4GB
       4.  create logical volume `lv_var` 30GB
       5.  create logical volume `lv_vlog` 8GB
       6.  create logical volume `lv_vaudit` 8GB
       7.  create volume group `temp_vg`
       8.  create logical volume `lv_swap` 8GB
   4.  Setup LVM logical volumes
       1.  use `lv_root`   format ext4 mount /
       2.  use `lv_home`   format ext4 mount /home
       3.  use `lv_var`    format ext4 mount /var
       4.  use `lv_vlog`   format ext4 mount /var/log
       5.  use `lv_vaudit` format ext4 mount /var/log/audit
       6.  use `lv_swap`   swap

-  Install Basic Server

## Post Install

I already have a `post1`, `upd` and `updone` scripts I use to set apt to use my local `apt-cacher-ng` proxy, update the machine, and clean up when done updating the machine. 
I ran the `post1` script. I found the Konstruktoid required a few packages so I did a `sudo apt install -y net-utils procps`.
I then shutdown the server VM then took a snapshot.


# All Yours Konstruktoid

Copied the steps to configure here for convenience.

## Login, set a Grub2 password, configure and run ubuntu.sh

-  Do not add any packages.
-  Log in.
-  Select a Grub2 password (using `grub-mkpasswd-pbkdf2`).
-  Download the script using `git clone https://github.com/konstruktoid/hardening.git`.
-  Change the configuration options in the `ubuntu.cfg` file and last but not least run the script, `sudo bash ubuntu.sh`.

## Configuration options

```
FW_ADMIN='127.0.0.1' // (1)
SSH_GRPS='sudo' // (2)
SSH_PORT='22' // (3)
SYSCTL_CONF='./misc/sysctl.conf' // (4)
AUDITD_MODE='1' // (5)
AUDITD_RULES='./misc/audit-base.rules ./misc/audit-aggressive.rules ./misc/audit-docker.rules' // (6)
LOGROTATE_CONF='./misc/logrotate.conf' // (7)
NTPSERVERPOOL='0.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org 1.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org 2.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org 3.ubuntu.pool.ntp.org pool.ntp.org' // (8)
TIMEDATECTL='' // (9)
VERBOSE='N' // (10)
AUTOFILL='N' // (11)
CHANGEME='' // (12)
```

1.  The IP addresses that will be able to connect with SSH, separated by spaces.
2.  Which group the users have to be member of in order to acess via SSH, separated by spaces.
3.  Configure SSH port.
4.  Stricter sysctl settings.
5.  Auditd failure mode. 0=silent 1=printk 2=panic.
6.  Auditd rules.
7.  Logrotate settings.
8.  NTP server pool.
9.  Add a specific time zone or use the system default by leaving it empty.
10.  If you want all the details or not.
11.  Let the script guess the FW_ADMIN and SSH_GRPS settings.
12.  Add something just to verify that you actually glanced the code.

### My Notes

To begin with I only changed two configuration options:

```
FW_ADMIN='127.0.0.1 192.168.0.666'   # my host IP
CHANGEME='we are Motorhead and we play rock and roll'
```

# So, Did it Work?

In short, no.

## Issues

The `/etc/fstab` written by the `08_fstab` script did not have a `/var/log`, `/var/log/audit`, and `/tmp` mount points in `/etc/fstab`. I know why and am going to open an issue and rewrite the scripts based on my work with 18.04 secure BTRFS.
Part of the issue is creating a new `fstab` based on the previous one; and IMO you should always edit in place using `sed -i` to avoid losing lines critical to system operation.
